So I'm with Brigitte and we're going to talk about your memories of the Siempris disaster,
the oil spill and what were your first memories of, how did it first affect you?
How did it first affect me? What I remember is seeing the news about it the night when the
storm or something happened and that boat that ran aground and then I had a call from some friends
in France who said to me, oh we've just seen a program about the tanker in Pembrokeshire and
etc and we're so sorry to hear that and I was saying well nothing's happened yet but on the
French news they had a lot more information than we did and that was my first memory.
What were you doing at the time in Temby? What was I doing with my life you mean? Well we were
living in Havertz so it was quite a busy household. James was working in the hotel and I was working
as a French teacher at the time and kids were little, we were on the beach all the time with
them and it was really quite scary to watch it happen and think but surely you know can't
they do this or why don't they do that? You know everybody had that way that humans have which is
to deny what we're seeing with our own eyes or blame or think there must be a better solution
and it was it was really quite hectic, didn't know what to think. So you just walked down to
the beach? And so it took I don't remember exactly how long it took, the oil didn't arrive in Temby
straight away, maybe took a couple of days or something and the morning it arrived in Temby,
yeah we walked down to the seafront and just looked at this crowds of people all ages,
you know everybody was there and people were crying, that was the main thing we could see,
people were had tears rolling down their faces, old men, teenagers, children, you know everyone
was just so horrified and grieving, there was a shock and it was horrible,
I've never experienced grief at that scale, I've never been such a you know a whole population and
even those who weren't there you could feel the whole county was in shock and at the time I was,
I don't know if I started studying counseling but certainly maybe I was 96, yes I had and
obviously just feeling that grief and feeling the natural kind of response to grief which is to
gather up and talk with people and comfort each other and you know all of that, so in the same
way as if somebody had died, it felt like a natural thing to want to be together and not
just together in our houses but together by the sea because it felt that there were all these
animals that had died, millions of things big and small and birds and shells and you know
it was very strong, strong that feeling that there had been a massive death of creatures
and obviously for us humans the consequences of that that we understood or didn't understand
or knew about or didn't know about but we could feel the impact and so yeah I went home and took
my you know it was before computers, before we had computers in our own homes, before we had mobile
phones so I just took my diary and my phone book and just ran every single number that was on there
and told people if they wanted to meet up on Castle Hill, maybe a couple of nights from then,
I was in the fun all day just and then people saying I can't come but you know I'll light a
candle or light a fire in the garden or and so it happened here but I was away, it was also happening
in other places and then that's what happened. So how many people came? I don't know, there was
quite a lot of, hundreds, probably something like that, wow, a lot of people and we're just
looking at the sea. Was it quiet? Yeah it was it was quiet and it was yeah it was quiet and it was
quite sombre and it's like you could feel something quite powerful really and then I remember feeling
a bit not so happy at one moment because the local of Véca kind of took three paroles, decided to say something
and I don't remember what he said but suddenly there was a sort of religious something which
I felt wasn't very sensitive because it went way beyond anything human and I don't know,
I thought it was a bit of and at the same time I can see the temptation you know you gather people,
you need a speaker and there wasn't one and so he did that and I'm sure for a lot of people it
was the right thing to do. I find at times like that you have to be sensitive to the language
that you use so that people don't feel excluded but then we're all very used to things like that
happen so people who wanted to listen and people who didn't just moved along a little bit and it
was fine there were lots of kids, lots of families. How long did it last? Maybe an hour,
something like that. We were there for quite you know quite a few hours obviously we were
there beforehand and then stayed on talking with lots of people. I met Kara Wilson whom I had not
met before and we got talking and then ended up doing this event in the Queen's Hall together
with also Beatrice from Manabeel Castle. She was involved in our little group and Emma was I think
Kara's sister-in-law. Yeah just four of us. We got a little bit of funding, invited these people
to come and do these workshops and took part in that. Tell me a bit about the people that came
who did the workshops? There were young people I've just reread the you know the posters and
the bits of paper that I kept from then and it's better explained on there than but I just remember
that they were part of a sort of international youth sustainable ecology kind of green group
and they were touring Europe with display boards and information and they were running workshops
in schools and community halls and on issues of ecology and so we got them to come to Pembrokeshire.
They were here for maybe four or five days and contacted lots of schools, primary schools,
quite a few answered and were keen and so they hosted them and the group delivered sort of art,
drama workshops. I remember one I think it's the one they did in 10B because I think one of my
nieces was in the class where they did it and it was something where they were pretending to make
the noise of the rain in a rainforest so they started maybe getting them to tap lightly on the
desk with their finger and then a bit harder and a bit harder and yeah I remember my niece coming
home and telling me about that so you know they would have done things like that. Did they talk
about the Sea Empress? Did they relate it directly to it? Well it all happened around the same time
and I suppose people were connecting it in their mind. I don't know they weren't here to
to make any decisions or any comment about this particular. They were talking in general I think
about pollution and about yeah all those issues. I don't know I don't think they were focusing
only on the sea. I suppose if it was that fresh they wouldn't have needed to make the connections.
No I think everybody including children were very aware around that time that we were going
through an ecological disaster so everything that had to do with the world and etc they were very
aware that their world had taken a beating and I think we're very sensitive to anything that was
helping them to maybe stay positive and maybe think of the future with a feeling that they
could do something to enable the planet to survive all these things. I think it was done
in very much in a future orientated and giving people giving children particularly a sense of
optimism that we didn't just have to suffer things like that. We could make gestures and
decisions and that would lead things in a better direction. That was the idea.
So and the Queen's Hall is that's where you had your? That's where we did the main we had a
workshop in the daytime and then there was a gig in the evening and an exhibition and a competition,
a recycling competition and we had Dennis Curry who came to be our judge and at the time the
people from the gallery in Arbuth who gave a prize you know it was all very low key but
the exhibition was called Pollution? Yes, yeah. That run obviously for a longer over a longer
period a few weeks or something I think and went with that group set we went to different
places including one day they set up outside I don't remember what the shop was called at the
time but one of the supermarket brands in the one that's in Pembroke Dock next to the library
and they went and asked the manager if they could set up their little display thing outside the shop.
Manager was quite happy with that so we spent a few hours there giving leaflets to people and
etc and I remember obviously they were challenging people's and it's interesting
because we're looking at 20 years ago and of course then people we were all still using plastic
bags left right and center and and I remember one of them had kind of maybe pushed the boat
a little bit too much with the people at the till in the shop he got told off I think anyway
because it was the time when at the till people had access to all these plastic bags
they were just coming out of the you know people went counting we were just using using using and
and it was the time when you couldn't buy anything from like if you bought some cheddar
they would put that in a see-through plastic bag and then put it in the carrier bag yeah and so
those young people from set had gone to buy a few things and and had you know stopped the queue and
and kind of made this big spill that they didn't want their vegetable or their cheese or etc to be
put in separate plastic bag in style the plastic bag and people at the till who were saying that
it was their instruction and they had to do it and so that you know there was a bit of a
faffle about that but yes that was 20 years ago and a lot of the people around were looking at these
young young people looking a bit scruffy
speaking with foreign accents all of them making a fuss about plastic bags and look now yeah
last progress very slow progress but and look how proud people have been that
you know that Wales has stopped using plastic bags way before England started it you know and people
are proud of that so yeah it is interesting to see how and I guess at the time the whole idea with
this project set was sowing seeds you know just putting ideas out for people to sort of
look at and maybe challenge or or take on board or
it must have been quite powerful for kids because they like we said that they they had experience
that's a real event to link it to I want because now it's just it just seems so removed doesn't it
to what we we experience we're we're supposed to be aware but when it's actually on your doorstep
but that's the whole thing and it's it's always been like that and
you know it's the the power of the connection that we are able to make or to filter out and
you know before the seampress and since the seampress there's been
huge catastrophes and if you're connected with you know you might be living in Wales but maybe your
you know you might be living in Wales but maybe your
children or best friends or whatever live on the coast of some other countries somewhere else and
and you hear of a catastrophe like that there and you're going to feel it a lot more
than if you don't know anybody who lives there and then it's a news item and then it's you know
a bad thing and you you kind of you'll have some level of feelings about it some level of
thinking about it but unless you're you've been there you're connected with the land itself or
you know people there it's not going to mean the same thing to you and I think that's just the
only way we have to cope with the level of information that gives us
information at the level of the planet it's it's a bit too big for most of us I think to really
take every single thing that happens with the same level of empathy we'll go mad
yeah we'll go mad if we did that and the the exhibition was in june is that right
I think I saw that on there maybe I can't quite remember yes in june so all the oil would have
gone by then or yeah not visible to the eye it wasn't visible anymore because you know that
obviously it's a touristic place and they tried very hard to make the beaches usable by easter
and were you really amazed at that did you think it was going to just never get back to normal again
um no we didn't think it would never get back to normal we knew it would even but we didn't know
how long obviously the sort of easter seemed not long enough for sure but then the biggest problem
was the difference between what you can see and what you can't see and although the beaches were
clean you couldn't see any oil um none of us I'm saying none of us a lot of people didn't feel
confident we didn't go down the beach in pembrokeshire at all we didn't step on the sand
really I was gonna ask you about that because I'm quite interested in that fact to sort of
get an angle on when local people started going back down to the beaches or when you'd go in the
sea even yeah so you didn't go down for the whole summer no did you go to other beaches or yeah
yeah
but not really you know it wasn't a it wasn't a beach summer for we just did other things and
but um didn't feel confident I mean my kids were five and seven yeah you know
I didn't really want to put them in a
in a situation that I didn't know enough to you know I didn't understand it I don't know how
long it takes to break down I don't know what it's made you know I had nothing really so I just
respond to situations with um caution well exactly yeah exactly and were you aware of um any kind of
health reaction no um but I remember where we lived um there were lots of trees all around the
house and we had a lot a lot of rook rooks at the front of the house and the back of the house which
was more towards the sea we had always lots of seagulls flying by and etc you know it was
rooks and seagulls you'd hear them all day all night well not all night but almost um they
the soundscape was very familiar of you know these big birds really lots of them
and they all they all disappeared they're you know all the birds um you didn't see any bird
flying anyway they all went inland um for quite a while because also they were spraying um
some detergent or something or other um so there was quite a lot of that around as well as the
fumes and so yeah birds didn't didn't stick out the seagulls they were nowhere to be seen for ages
and um and even the rooks they they went in the forest and they came back but not for a while
and that was very obvious suddenly it was quite eerie because it was silent
there was a real hush you know that
even you know things like as a population of people there was that
that's hushing down that happens when people are in shock or when people are
upset or
yeah and there were you know kind of patches of oil that people were careful to you know like all
the teams that were down on the beach cleaning and cleaning oh my god you know
no idea if it was right for people to be down there doing that like that but they did you know
people did i don't know what impact that had or would have or um and they were just in you know
wellies and and just cleaning
you know gathering buckets and big it was a massive undertaking from a lot of people who gave a lot of
time and effort and took a lot of risks um yeah and people were careful not to drag all that back
into the streets but still you could see you could see oil here and then
and when you did your video did you have any press coverage of it
do you i had a call from a radio station i can't remember what
what
welsh radio bbc ways could have been sudden some
yeah yeah they ran me in the afternoon
and
and that was it really so they weren't aware of their presence during it no no i don't think they
were around and there were some photos in the paper
i think the vigil there was only that one photo of emily and the amphibian in the paper and that was
uh
and i can't remember his name right now and his best one of any best friend's dad who took the
photo who works as a photographer for the local paper
i think there was as well as um a real kind of
um
sense of gratitude that we all felt towards each other for whoever turned up felt for everybody
else who turned up you know yeah there was a sense of comfort um but there was also
so inevitably when everything goes well people are divided so there is no reason we should be
different yeah when things don't go well and so there were divisions that's you know showed
at those times um and i think maybe some people thought it was too
to uh you know it had to do with emotions and yeah it didn't sit that well with some people
i imagine who didn't come then i imagine and that was fine it is interesting because i've spoken to
quite a lot of people and the the difference of opinions and i can imagine that some people might
find they wouldn't want anything um negative you know it's all about oh we've got to be positive
we've got to get it all clean and get all our tourists back here and kind of shove it under
the carpet in a way yes not shove it under the carpet but just like get rid of the evidence and
and not have time for that yes sort of what might seem sentimental and yeah yeah after all they
might say there were no human deaths but it's not about that was it well no um
no it it wasn't about human death and that was what was so
you know a lot of people have experienced grief from having lost a person
but this was a grief about environment it was
identical in the sense of
um shock and loss and the stages of grief and you know it was identical
and it was about all the creatures that have died like some people might feel or have felt you know
uh when we had all the curls that had to happen with the foot and mouth thing and yeah yeah all
of that you know and and the badger curl and you know all of that it it affects you when
when you look at a massive amount of creatures who end up dying at the same time you know whether
it's people or animals it's it has the power to move us in the same way
in the same way of course it's not the same but
it's in a way that is still very deep and
but it questions humanity doesn't it questions why we need to be doing these things
and and you know it gives people um markers like before the sea empress after the sea empress
where were you and the sea empress you know it's those those things they they
suddenly they kind of put that date on the calendar and and there was the world before
and the world after and and that also is similar to grief yeah about other things because the
people are still really emotional about it now when we talk about it yeah a huge impact on
people's lives it was that complete uh experience of what you hear about without really realizing
it's like before you have children and then you have children and then you understand and it was
that same thing suddenly we understood what it made what it meant well what everybody had been
on about we understood it and what it means to lose something really precious and what it meant
to have taken something so precious for granted that there was a real sense of
people were talking a lot about that about that having taken
things for granted
it our environment for granted not really ever conceiving that it could be taken away
and for us it was taken away and it was given back
um
i saw this program about joanna joanna lamley in japan and she goes to fukushima
and goes through the village that people left there and then thinking oh they'll be back in a
few days you know once the water kind of recedes and and they've never been back
that was taken away and that's not given back
yeah for us we yeah based on the environment looked as if nothing had happened
which was really weird i can imagine that would be really strange it was and and we didn't trust it
a lot of people didn't trust it a lot of people did and but we've never really um and i suppose unless you are
a marine biologist and you're involved in doing that research
it's very hard to get information that you are going to trust these days you know and there
then and still now
if you heard one person it was like this if you heard another person it was like that
difficult to find out more than what we are being fed at that time it was a complete unknown
wasn't it because it hadn't really happened i mean for a lot of people for a lot of
biologists and scientists it was something that they just didn't know what was going to happen
well it had happened in other places but obviously but for people like the the
oriolton research center the the rock pools i don't think anyone knew how it would ever recover what
what the consequence consequences would be but and of course it was
although people in situations like that already had access to internet and but
not everything was on internet like it is now so now if something like that happens you can find
information at an individual level you know people will just say oh but then it'll be all right i've
looked it up but yeah exactly um but certainly then people couldn't even do that people just had to
gather information from what was in the paper or on the radio or on tv or or if you knew somebody
who worked more closely with this that and the other and i remember i don't know how it happened
i was somewhere
um i might have been in um because i was teaching in bloomfield at the time
at the time i don't know where i met these people three um americans three men who
were they just flown from america
to offer
um to offer the rescue operation um some kind of are they called booms oh yeah the booms booms
um they had a system to do with that made from straw or something
or something
which they could um use to stop to stop the oil going you know people were actually
flying in coming in from different parts of the world who had already dealt with situations like
that in other places had products for sale and skills for sale you know and who were coming and
offering their services and um i remember i introduced them to friends of the earth we were
they turned up at one of the meetings and it was just a bit chaotic because you know
as often there was the sort of
official county council type of way of doing things and then there were groups like friends of the earth
who had different ideas
it certainly was a time when people gathered up for all sorts of reasons the vigil was
gathering up for reasons of sharing common emotions as opposed to experiencing them on your own
and then they were people who gathered up to look at other aspects of that same situation
and one of the things that came out of the sea empress disaster was that people became a lot
more engaged in wanting to know wanting to do something and at the time the the anti they had
been already an anti ore emulsion
faction that had already worked hard at
trying to get the population to fight against ore emulsion
and i don't know what would have happened if the sea empress disaster hadn't happened
maybe ore emulsion would have happened as it is after the sea empress
the sort of group that was fighting against ore emulsion coming into pembrokeshire
and then
took on a lot more importance and strength and there was a real campaign then that was well
manned and organized and womaned and organized and was successfully
stopped ore emulsion being shipped in to
because that was another really scary thing that was happening at the time and so
you know we were just experiencing this oil slick knowing that we were under threat to have
something much more dangerous in terms of human lives then yeah because it had an explosive
aspect to it well didn't it so that
it puts
you know a lot of communities at risk because the cloud of you know if there was to be a spill of
ore emulsion my understanding anyway at the time was that the cloud of
fumes could travel quite far inland and explode
so you know we were yeah it was a very scary time to to be seeing what was going on with
an oil spill knowing that unless we did something we were
we were going to be at risk of something even more yeah so it's a a warning it was a warning
but it was also really scary to to think that maybe we wouldn't be strong enough to oppose it and
and then we were you know it's one thing before thinking oh yeah it might happen and yeah we
don't want it and it's a bad thing and etc but not really taking on quite how scary it was how bad it was
so at the time it meant
it meant um yeah like a double
it served one you know it helped people to achieve that and to have a stronger voice i imagine and a
a bigger perspective isn't it yeah yeah
so just one last thing do does it ever come up in conversation then has it been you know previous to
to this um not for a long time not for a long time
accidentally
yes so i don't know um
um yeah i hadn't um thought about it much for a while and then came across that photograph
oh it was in the paper that's right the photo of emily and the amphibian was in the paper the 10b
time you know that thing where they look back on okay so this was recently yeah yeah not that long
ago and so when he put that up in her kitchen and then so suddenly there it was and um we realized
it had been a while that we hadn't thought of that time or um i had um
a nice surprise at christmas um sort of christmas drinks
um with the the team that i the sort of wider team that i work with in herford west and emma who
and emma who had been part of our little group that set up this um this project
i hadn't seen emma for years and there she was she's a speech therapist so we work for the same
inclusion team and that was nice to see each other um and when we do we know that
that that is the basis of our connection and that's quite a strong you know you go through
things like that with people and um and it yeah i haven't seen cara for a few years but um
our friendship is linked to that that time when we met under those circumstances
circumstances and that was before abby asked you if you would oh yeah yeah yeah so and did you feel
like you didn't maybe didn't want to or you're a bit like i don't no i i um i was quite taken by the
idea of your project you know the uh sort of looking back and seeing how things
have been remembered um in fact i was talking with um somebody saying you know
how what's the life expectancy of sea creatures you know i know whales would remember something
that happened 20 years before and dolphins would and and then uh kai said to me lobsters
live for many many years so they would have a memory of it because you know most of the
creatures who were affected by that or a lot i don't think they last for very long
no it's funny to be able to tell their story when we when we had our walk and talk uh thing
that abby organized the other day there were some limpets that did look quite old so i did try an
interview yeah yeah but you know some of them because they can last many years so
we you know we were thinking were they around when it happened because obviously a lot of them died
but then that's right and i don't you know i don't know i don't know um you hear about
whale songs and etc i don't know how a story gets told or transmitted
under the sea but it made me think of that when when abby told me about the project
concept isn't it i can tell my story of what happened 20 years ago and i was at an age where
i can remember it my children and he could just about remember some things but not that much she
was only five emily when i mentioned it to her she said oh yeah you know two years older and already
you're a lot more you have access to memories but yeah i thought it was interesting because
immediately triggered memories for me and and immediately made me think you know as humans we
we keep our memories we we tell them we sing them we write them we paint them we do all sorts of
things we store them and we pass them on as sea creatures i don't know or birds i don't know
what birds tell each other you know there's probably some skeptics out there that deny
you deny it happened or something do you remember that time when we all flew we had to fly inland
but yeah that's what it's a lot of them lost their ancestors that's right yes there's probably some
it never happened it's you know and then you look at the the memory of water that's quite a it's
supposed to be quite a minefield yeah of you know whether you believe it or not whether you i don't
know anything about it except that it in my body it makes sense yeah you know in my way of looking
at the world it makes sense that memories get stored in lots of ways in lots of things and in
fact yeah all the geologists all the you know that they can see what gets stored so there is a memory
other than ours of what happened there are there will definitely be traces of it won't they for sure
yes yes i heard that in the
is it in the haven or somewhere the the oil actually
the as of the tidal thing went into the estuary and sank in the mud and you can see it now it's
created some sort of a bit like asphalt yeah all i know is that john who's doing the talk said that
the last bit of oil to spill from the tanker was a completely different type of oil it's more like
a tar and there's a in bentless in handleton yeah there's like a they call it like the tar platform
so it's like a pavement of tar yeah that's what she was saying yeah so they were definite i'm sure
there must be lots of places which have got traces of it somewhere i mean 20 years isn't even that
much time really so yes it will be there and it will be there
you know in the dunes in god knows where really but
not disappeared it doesn't disappear not on the travel brochures not on the travel brochures
and then people forgot it in terms of that you know yeah for a while
when you mention panbrookshire or you mentioned 10b people would say oh gosh yeah you've had that
oil spill you know and now it's i've never i don't you know people never say something like that
that and yes in terms of the
tourists board and you know all the initiatives that took place to all the press all the
that really were behind all the cleaning effort they did well
you know i think a lot of people did
did well in making things get back to some sort of normality making things get back to
some sort of functioning i wasn't sure myself about telling people that they could go in
the sea i wouldn't have done that myself i didn't go in myself people just were a bit
i think hasty in saying that there was no problem there
but then certainly you had the livelihood of thousands of people that depended on that season
people do what they've got to do to make sure
in a way it was about damage limitation
yeah
right that's fantastic thank you